welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well welcome once again to
church history and theology as we delve
into the fascinating topic of leadership
in the apostolic church I tell you when
we start on studies like this one of the
things that I'm always is very grateful
to be working with is the scriptures
these scriptures reveal to us a whole
lot about the early part of the church
and his leadership structure and what
the roles were of the various people
involved with this as we look into this
I'm going to encourage you to grab your
Bibles there's a lot of scripture
references most of them I will read but
we're going to be looking at so many of
them it probably help to have your Bible
handy um and uh and also a pause button
in order to turn back and forth I get to
prepare ahead of time and have all these
things ready on my screen and um and be
able to work through them all but uh but
as we work through these some of these
issues are going to be pretty quick
especially when we get to some of the
references regarding New Testament
prophets and teachers and things like
that so but uh here at the beginning I
really wanted to give you an overview of
what we're going to look at this evening
and that is this concept of leadership
in the Apostolic Church what what was
the first church structured like as best
as we can piece together and then
immediately after that the
post-apostolic church what did it look
like what offices were made for
permanency uh that we end up having
qualifications for and ways to choose
people for these things and so forth uh
when we when we start to open the book
of Acts we would probably
be we would probably be forgiven for
overlooking some of these offices
because we don't talk about them hardly
ever uh in the New Testament era but
it's important as we are studying church
history to try to recreate what in the
world was going on in the first church
because we have all of these little
little nuggets of information kind of
sprinkled throughout the Book of Acts
and uh various Epistles and it really
helps us to be able to assemble it all
together and this is what my goal is for
this evening is to get uh a as as clear
a picture as we can get of the different
Authority and uh and responsibility
structures inside the first church as
well as the let's call it the the second
church or the post-apostolic church and
how consistent they are with one another
yet developed and once they develop it
becomes solidified you're going to see
uh a number of things here I hope that
are new and are clear to you and uh I
hope a couple of challenges for you as
well regardless of what tradition you
come from uh I know I was certainly
challenged with regards to some of the
assumptions I had had uh when I've been
uh writing this particular episode the
past month and a half and um and I'll
tell you it's it's it's a good study and
one that I'm looking forward to delve
into so let's let's go ahead and delve
straight into that and that is going to
be the original leadership of the
Apostolic Church the first thing we have
to talk about is the
scriptures now by the scriptures of
course we are talking about the
apostolic church we are not yet speaking
of the New Testament so we start at the
Old Testament prophets the Hebrew
scriptures if you will this is what the
New Testament will call and Jesus calls
and the apostles call the the prophets
or the law and the prophets or the law
and the writings and the prophets
however you want to refer to it the
shorthand for it is the Old Testament
prophets meaning the Hebrew scriptures
everything from Moses all the way down
to Malachi everything that was written
for the benefit of the church these
things these examples these people's
lives everyone the time of the judges
the time of the United Kingdom the time
of the divided Kingdom the times of uh
of dwelling ding in the promised lands
the times of Exile whether in Babylon or
whether in Egypt the the entire story
and the
entire edifice if you will of the Jewish
religion uh in its scriptures belongs to
the
church the the first church had as its
main Authority the Hebrew
scriptures uh excuse me specifically the
Old Testament prophets in the Hebrew
scriptures now I'm going to I'm going to
going to put this forward as part of the
leadership structure of the original
church this is why because the
scriptures play a role that are even
over and above assuming that there's
going to be consistency between the
scriptures that were given to the uh to
the Jews and then all the way down to
the church there's going to be
consistency with them and with Christ
and with the apostles and so what what
the early church does what the first
church does is analyze the scriptures to
ensure that what the apostles are saying
comports to the reality of the Old
Testament scriptures you're going to see
these types of things you're going to
see this as the developing habit of all
that come after it the Hebrew scriptures
were there for Christians to check the
apostles teachings for consistency with
the revelation of God this is something
that um is absolutely Central with
regards to our relationship as
Christians to the Old Testament
scriptures as we call it the Old
Testament scriptures the Hebrew
scriptures all sorts of of terminologies
for this you will actually see this
emphasized for us in Acts 17:
10-2 uh a passage that I'm sure many
people are aware of is referred to the
church in
Berea there we pick up the story that
the brothers immediately sent Paul and
Silas Away by night to Berea when they
arrived they went into the Jewish
synagogue now this is again this is
going to be a place where the Hebrew
scriptures are plainly read are plainly
understood this was Paul's habit
everywhere he went he would go and start
in the synagogue first why not just
because you're starting at a similar
base but because Old Testament Saints
are there truly saved individuals who
have yet to hear about the coming of the
Messiah and so he goes to these places
and he tells them all about this and
let's let's learn about these look at
verse 11 in Acts chapter 17 now these
Jews were no more noble than those in
thessalonica they received the word with
all eagerness Examining the Scriptures
Daily to see if these things were
so notice one of the things that Paul
does not do he does not just go in and
say Here's my Apostolic Authority end of
story it doesn't matter what you see in
Scripture it doesn't matter what your
personal interpretation is or any of
that kind of uh stuff he doesn't say
that go and see that these things are
consistent the people in Berea these are
not Elders this is not an established
church this is a synag ogue these are
Old Testament Saints what were they
doing they were examining the Hebrew
scriptures for consistency with the
apostles message they were Examining the
Scriptures Daily to see if these things
were so many of them therefore believed
and this becomes a central aspect of the
leadership of the Old Testament prophets
in the first church their leadership is
codified into the Old Testament writings
and Old Testament Saints are able to
look at the apostles and weigh what they
are claiming and weigh what they are
saying with scripture
consistency across Revelation across the
leadership structure of the church
across even to the authority structure
of the
Apostles if the apostles were preaching
a different God if the apostles were
preaching a different message if the
apostles were teaching about a messiah
that is not consistently fulfilled from
the Old Testament scriptures then we
have a massive problem on our
hands the scriptures are in charge the
Old Testament prophets had a leadership
role in the First Apostolic church and
that is that what God had said before is
going to be consistent with God saying
things now and the outcome of that is
that the Old Testament Saints in the U
in the synagogue and
Berea
believed and it says there not a few
Greek women of high standing as well as
men a remarkable story that really
emphasizes for us this point that the
scriptures play a central role in the
leadership of the early church these
things we usually will talk about the
leadership in the first church and start
with Apostles we'll start with offices
but I would argue that we are actually
missing a massive piece of the puzzle
and it actually confuses us
significantly when we come to discuss
the current offices of the church which
we will talk about in a little bit but
before we even start to the apostles we
have to deal with the fact that the Old
Testament prophets the Hebrew scriptures
played a central role also in the
management of the first church it was in
confirming the significant consistency
that is existing between the apostles
Jesus and the Old Testament prophets the
same God of Israel is the same God and
father of our Lord Jesus Christ this is
no new message this is a new chapter of
the same message okay so let's go on to
the first of the
offices the
apostles now believe it or not this is
actually kind of a dicey term because
Apostles is used specifically and
technically of the original 12 obviously
with Judas scariot being replaced by
Mias in chapter one of the book of Acts
and also Paul as he calls himself an
apostle born out of
turn these 13 men are in the technical
sense the only
Apostles period there are others like
Barnabas Silas and Timothy who are
referred to as Apostles in a non
technical sense the difficulty lies in
the original Greek for Apostle is just
meaning one who is sent and the apostles
sent people and then called them the
ones we sent the sent ones it doesn't
mean that they are creating new Apostles
in the authoritative Jesus commissioning
type sense but it does mean that you
have to be very careful in looking at
this terminology with regards to those
like Barnabas and Silas and Timothy and
others that is not specifically denoting
them as Apostles I I I even refrained
from saying capital A as the office of
apostle rather than one who is Apostle
one who is sent out which is all apostas
really means with this so it does it is
used in the technical sense and in the
non-technical sense in the New Testament
and there's got to be really clear about
that we are talking about 13 Apostles
the original 12 plus one that's Paul and
then one of the characteristics of the
Apostles that I'll simply point out only
because
uh there's other offices that are
specifically donated is different than
this this one is males
only they have a qualification it they
are chosen by Christ directly right Paul
on the road to Damascus obviously also
the original 12 uh and uh and with the
loss of Judas es scariot on purpose as
Jesus says in John 17 and the
maintaining of the other 11 and then
maias is a chosen one out of a group who
have always been with Jesus himself
since the very beginning so Mias was
witness to that you can see even the
testimony of that in Acts chapter
1 we see that this is the original way
of it uh you can see one of the crowning
uh references to the different offices
in the early church and that's going to
kind of be a a a Headwater if you will
and that's Ephesians chapter
4:1 Ephesians chapter 4:1 actually talks
about uh the various offices of the
early church and that is this of the
first church excuse me I really wanted
to know the Apostolic Church from that
which came after it because they're
actually quite different he says in
Ephesians chap 4: 11 that Christ gave to
the church
Apostles prophets evangelists Shepherds
and
teachers uh those are five different
offices spelled out there it's not
Shepherd teachers it's Shepherds and
teachers you'll see why in just a minute
and the very first one there is apostles
he gave the apostles to the church uh
they had the same uh ultimate goal as
the prophets the evangelists the
Shepherds meaning the elders and the
teachers which is actually a different
office in the first church but not in
the post-apostolic church we'll get
there all of those five
offices Express out the
responsibility to equip the Saints for
the work of the ministry that whole
passage in Ephesians 4: 11-15 says that
there is a Unity for the church that is
devoted to the leaders of the church we
are to equip the Saints for the work of
the ministry that they may attain unto
the unity of Christ right and so the
apostles have this as their uh as one of
their ultimate goals so to the prophets
so to the evangelists so to the elders
and so to the
teachers now if you look at that list
you'd be probably a little set back if
you're uh in in any church today because
you look at that and go well we don't
have five offices like that yeah I know
that's why we're going to uh pull that
apart right here uh so as we go from
Apostles we move on to something that
hardly anyone ever talks about and that
is New Testament
prophets there is a significant office
in the first church called New Testament
prophets the prophets of the New
Testament the prophets of the first
generation of the church was a temporary
office now when I say temporary I don't
mean it just came up as a little thing
at the beginning of the church I mean
temporary in that it came to an end why
do I say that I'll show you why it is a
continuation of the Old Testament
prophets that winds down after the New
Testament is written that is my
suggestion here it's a continuation of
the Old Testament prophets that
continues through with John the Baptist
and you find multiple instances of New
Testament prophets and several commands
about the responsibilities and their
exact purpose some of their
responsibilities Etc and I really wanted
to spend a little bit more time with New
Testament prophets because I imagine
it's something that not a lot of people
spend time on certainly something that I
grew up and never really understood uh
when I passed over a reference to it
what in the world I was reading so I
want to introduce the concept to this
first of all that new testament prophets
are an extension of the Old Testament
prophetic office just as Moses was a
prophet he was also a leader as well
just as Elijah was an oral prophet and
Isaiah was a written
prophet and you have Jeremiah as well
Ezekiel
Daniel excuse me you have all of these
things
together and then in the New Testament
you have John the Baptist as Jesus
himself refers to him as a prophet and
then we also then have New Testament
prophets rising in the book of Acts and
you see references to them especially
hugely in First Corinthians uh we'll get
there as
well this is a very unique office in the
first
church and it is mentioned in a
multiplicity of areas and one of the
things that I want to see want you to
see the overarching realm of this and
the role of all prophets because again
in the first church you do not have this
harsh line between New Testament and Old
Testament prophets the New Testament
hasn't been written yet so I want you to
see in Acts 10:
43 settle settle your minds in this
straight away in there we realize that
regarding to Christ all the prophets
bear witness that everyone who believes
in Him receives forgiveness of sins
through his
name we are sitting at a time where we
can draw lines between Old Testament and
New Testament prophets but they weren't
in Acts chapter 10 all the prophets that
God has sent bear witness that everyone
who believes in Jesus receives
forgiveness of sins through his name
that
includes everyone from Moses to Isaiah
to Malachi to John the Baptist and to
the New Testament prophets agabus and
the daughters of Philip the Evangelist
and the other prophets especially the
ones that are mentioned in 1 Corinthians
and the ones that dwelt in other places
that are never referenced this is really
significant because it really shows us
that there is consistency across the
board John the Baptist made straight the
way of the Lord in the New Testament
people are pointing other ones uh to
Christ himself and especially to the
authority of the Apostles that Christ
has sent it's it's one of these things
that I think gets passed over really
quick because we automatically read in
the New Testament all the prophets bear
witness and we instantly go back to the
old testament which we should but we
should also include in the New Testament
prophets it was their go goal as well to
Bear witness that everyone who believes
in Jesus Christ receives forgiveness of
sins through his
name that is not to say that they did
not have specific prophetic roles as
well uh the Old Testament prophets and
the New Testament prophets are just as
varied as each other Old Testament
prophets were very different than each
other they all had different roles some
of them had this role some of them had
that one of them has to depict his
entire message by his life the other one
gets called to visions of Heaven one
gets picked up by his hair and Drug
around the world and another one is
Raising people from the dead it the Old
Testament prophets were quite varied in
their specific Ministry so were the New
Testament
prophets but they all bear witness about
Christ and this is this is one of those
overarching aspects of actually all of
the office
of the New Testament and I would argue
all of the offices of the old Prophet
priest and King all of them are focusing
into Christ that is the whole point he
is the central focus of all of scripture
and revelatory history and so when we
look at the New Testament prophets we we
cannot miss that that's one of these
things as well so let's look at some of
these references regarding prophets
because I have a lot of them we're going
to look at some of the main ones here uh
there's a couple of others that I'm I'm
just just going to pass over for for use
of time but continue on you have for
instance in Acts 11:27 the very next
chapter that there was a group of
prophets that came down from Jerusalem
into Antioch now we're going to talk
about the church in Antioch we're going
to spend a whole night on the on the
city of Antioch because it's so Central
to the text of the book of Acts but just
to see here that prophets were being
commissioned and sent out of Jerusalem
to Antioch now how they were
commissioned or whatnot maybe that's too
hard of a terminology prophets were
leaving Jerusalem and going to Antioch
this is kind of this ongoing
presentation of the uh of the witness in
the book of Acts that everything starts
in Jerusalem and it continues out from
there because Jerusalem is at this point
still the center of the Apostolic
Church Antioch becomes a very
significant Hub of this as well uh but
at this point we are still dealing with
Jerusalem being the center of this
you can skip forward another chapter and
a half to Acts chapter
13:1 saying that now that there there
were in the Church of Antioch prophets
and teachers there's that other uh
there's that other one there Barnabas
Simeon who was called uh Niger uh L
Lucius of sirene Manan a lifelong friend
of Herod the tetrarch and Saul now this
is after Saul's conversion and he
immediately set up as one of the
teachers there he is nowhere else listed
as one of the prophets but he is listed
as one of the teachers so that is
something that comes off to us quite
directly we have multiple people here
that are uh fulfilling these roles of
these multiplicity of um of of roles and
leadership in the early church uh again
continue
on in chapter 19:6 you have one of these
references um we'll just see it as
passing that the Holy Spirit goes out
with this I I don't want to say it
rolling out but I don't really know of
this grad ual uh Revelation regarding
the Holy Spirit but you can see that
story in the book in the beginning of
the book of Acts verse uh Chapter 19
Verse six saying when Paul laid his
hands on them meaning this group of
people who only knew of the baptism of
John the Baptist he says when Paul had
laid his hands on them the Holy Spirit
came on them and they began speaking in
tongues and prophesying these types of
things again you may be forgiven to read
quickly and think that there's no
specific role here I simply want to
point out that just because somebody's
prophesying does not necessarily mean
that they fulfill a permanent
responsibility of profit uh but there it
doesn't necessarily mean that but it
certainly could mean that um and this is
one of those uh aspects here that we
will start to see couple other
references here last one in the book of
Acts is in chapter 29 uh 21: 9-10 and
this is regarding Philip the Evangelist
who was one of the first deacons uh his
four daughters all of them prophesied
and in the very same text the very next
verse uh while we were staying for many
days a prophet named agabus came down
from Judea again so now you have four
daughters who are again all all sisters
of one another four daughters of Philip
the Evangelist and then you have the
prophet agabus who comes down from Judea
and we start to see this this mixing the
different roles and agabus gives this
whole uh depiction of what's going to
happen to Paul if he's going to go in
he's going to be arrested he gets his
hands tied and all this kind of stuff
really Old Testament sounding depictions
of what's going to happen in the future
and that gives one of the primary roles
immediate future telling is one of the
roles of the New Testament prophets why
they're a continuation of the Old
Testament prophetic
office but I want to really pull us out
of just that as the
expectation they aren't just talking
about the future they have a whole
another Bevy of responsibilities in the
church that thankfully we have First
Corinthians to tell us about otherwise
we would be left really asking a lot of
questions like what in the world is
their main roles uh in the church other
than just talking about the future and
bearing witness to uh Jesus Christ we
actually have a lot more uh that are
revealed to us and I want you to see
them in 1 Corinthians specifically in
chapter 11 and chapter
14 in chapter 11 we have verses four and
five saying every man who prays or
prophesies with his head uncovered
dishonors his head but every wife who
prays or prophesies with her head
uncovered dishonors her head since it is
the same as if her head were shaven now
I'm not going to get into head coverings
and things like this that's not what
we're here for only to
say that the same thing that we just saw
in Acts chapter
21 both men and women are a part of this
leadership
structure prophets could be made up of
either men or women in the New Testament
ERA this is a fascinating thing because
one we are told that explicitly in Joel
chapter 2 it is quoted by Paul in Acts
chapter 2 on the day of Pentecost uh
that that this is going to be something
that goes beyond this kind of um this
expectation uh of just your um men's
servants but also on your female
servants as well uh there's there's
there's a specific way in which the
spirit at the beginning here is going to
work and so what do we have we have not
only Philip the angelist daughters but
we also have here in 1 Corinthians chap
11 you actually have a whole bunch of
women who are
prophesying in fact so many men and
women were prophesying in the church in
Corinth that Paul just basically shuts
everyone down and says look everyone
stopped talking everyone stopped
prophesying and one at a time and he
even had to shut down all the women in
chapter 14 and just say okay no no
nobody speak over here at all one man at
a time one man at a time one other
otherwise we have chaos right and so you
see that uh bear out as well in 1
Corinthians
14 we start to see this uh expression
here now I'm not going to talk about uh
all the speaking in tongues and
everything like that because I'm not
here for that right now but I do want
you to see that there is something
specific to the the gifting of the
prophets to the New Testament we know
it's an office in the original uh in the
original church and we also know that it
died away soon after the New Testament
was written I want you to see why that
is in 1 Corinthians
14 we start in verse one pursue love and
earnestly desire the spiritual gifts
especially that you may
prophesy for one who speaks in a tongue
speaks not to men but to God for no one
understands him for he utters the
mysteries of the spirit on the other
hand the one who prophesies speaks to
people now we see the purpose for their
up building
encouragement and
consolation the one who speaks in a
tongue builds up himself but the one who
prophesies builds up the church here is
one of the reasons why prophesying is
more significant and being a a new
testament Prophet here at the tail end
of the Old Testament prophets if you
will just the prophets of God why that
is more significant than speaking in
tongues speaking in tongues by the way
is a remarkable thing we saw it in Acts
chapter 2 and as it Carries On
fascinating stuff again topic for
another
day excuse me but here prophesying is
seen as something much greater why
because it is there for the edification
of the church just like the other
original first church offices it is
there to up build to edify to encourage
and to
console specifically
encouragement now this isn't just
through foreshadowing or telling the
future the proph consistently call
people to submission to the scriptures
the word of God this is what the Lord
says that's what true prophets do thus
says the Lord because the Lord has said
that and so their focus on the word of
God is going to be Central to their
entire Ministry and specifically to this
the scriptures are able to encourage Us
in these
things and the New Testament prophets
specifically had this role of
encouragement we actually see it
multiplied in reference uh in the book
of First Corinthians they have this
responsibility of consolation and I
would argue that whatever oral things
God was handing down through these
prophets that we don't fully have uh
Testament to though we see the
references to it we see agabus obviously
having been given a message of God that
is not recorded for us when that was
given we just have him coming and
displaying
something we just have him coming and
telling Paul the outcome of these things
but the the normative role of the New
Testament prophets was for the
edification of the church the same as
the apostles the same as the evangelists
and the pastors and the teachers it was
to edify the
church so that they would do the work of
the ministry it was to equip the church
their up building their encouragement
their
consolation this is why he says in verse
5 here in 1 Corinthians 14 now I want
you all to speak in tongues but even
more to
prophesy the one who prophesies is
greater than the one who speaks in
tongues unless someone interprets so
that the church may be built up and
again you have every spiritual gift
every spiritual office every role in the
church given by the holy spirit is meant
to build up the
church we can see later in the same
chapter in verse 25 just look a little
bit further on there with the prophets
the secrets of the hearts are
disclosed uh especially if
unbelievers and here he says the secrets
of his heart of the unbelievers heart is
disclosed and so falling on his face he
will worship God and declare that God is
really among
you this includes one of the
responsibilities of all prophets from
Moses onwards and that is a
convicting and a calling to
repentance convicting and calling them
to
account these these these types of
things is the main role of prophets Old
Testament and New Testament alike that
is here is what will happen here is what
God has promised therefore repent and
follow
him this is the same thing that John the
Baptist pointed out it's the same thing
he preached repent for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand is the same message
that Jesus
gave John the Baptist speaks to the
Pharisees and saying you do not have
fruit in keeping with repentance Jesus
commands repent and believe in the
gospel for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand he
reiterates in verse
31 that all of them are to take turns
prophesying so that all may learn and
all may be encouraged again reiterating
that encouragement learning consolation
upbuilding convicting repentance
revealing the secrets of unbelievers
hearts these are the primary roles of
the New Testament prophets also future
telling is part of this when the Lord
says something about the future the
prophets pass it along that's what they
do and the Lord doesn't say something
about the future they do speak to people
about the ramifications of their current
path if you keep going down this path
you will face the Judgment of God the
Judgment of God is Promised in the Holy
scriptures but I want to give you
something that I have never seen argued
and maybe that is because I have just
just been blind to it or whatnot but to
my mind one of the most
significant
roles of the New Testament prophets is
found here at the tail end of 1
Corinthians chapter
14 1 Corinthians chapter 14
ends uh ends at verse 40 but I want you
to back up a couple of
verses look at verse 36
saying here from verse 36 to verse
39 was it from you that the word of God
came or are you the only ones it has
reached if anyone thinks he is a prophet
or spiritual he should acknowledge that
the things I am writing to you are a
command of the Lord if anyone does not
recognize this he is not recognized
so my brothers earnestly desire to
prophesy and do not forbid speaking in
tongues but all things should be done
decently and in order if you missed it
there will be
consistency between true prophets and
the true Apostolic
writings I am going to argue from these
verses that one of the most significant
and long lasting effects of the New
Testament prophets role is in
recognizing the authority of the New
Testament documents as they were being
written there's going to be consistency
Paul says between true prophets and the
writings that Paul is literally Penning
to them right now before the ink is
dry he is telling them that there's
going to be those who recognize that
what he is writing to them is inspired
why because God is always consistent
with his own
Revelation the same God the same Spirit
of the prophets is the Same Spirit who
is inspiring the very pen of Paul at
that moment while he was writing 1
Corinthians CH 14 verse
37 if he thinks he's a PO a prophet or
spiritual you should acknowledge that
the things I am writing to you are a
command of the Lord this is not just
Paul
writing and true prophets in the New
Testament will recognize this this means
that we actually have testimony here
from the apostles own hand that the New
Testament prophets had at least some
role in recognizing the authority of the
New Testament documents for the
church what the extent of that role is
and how broad it was we can only guess
but we do have this clear reference to
it right here meaning that there will be
consistency between true prophets in the
New Testament era and true Apostolic
writings
which means quite a lot for the
identification of the Canon early on by
the way which is one of the reasons why
the vast majority of the New Testament
is never held in any contention between
anyone who is not obviously recognized
heretic who disagrees with the Old
Testament like marcian for instance but
if you hold to the Old Testament you're
going to see the consistency of the New
Testament this is I would argue one of
the clearest expressions of the fact
that there was a role of leadership in
the early church for identifying the
inspiration of apostolic writings
because here's the fun thing right Paul
actually did not just write two letters
to the church in Corinth but actually
wrote
four two of them were inspired two of
them weren't how did the early church
know I argue one of the ways that they
knew was not just merely recognizing
their Authority there was an office in
the New Testament Church specifically
here mentioned in the church in Corinth
that recognized which ones were commands
of the
Lord now I'd like to put that one out
there I'd certainly love some thoughts
on it but that one's pretty clear here
with regards to this because again what
does he say if anyone does not recognize
this he is not recognized meaning by the
Lord if there is not consistency between
the person claiming to be a prophet and
the inspiration of God in his scriptures
writings specifically here with this
writing of Paul he is giving them a
litmus test to understand which true
prophets there
are and their recognition of the
inspiration of God's writings here is
one of them means there's going to be
consistency across the board uh and
there's redundancy built in and this is
the way God does almost everything in
the New Testament era
redundancy speaking of which as we
continue on into the different off of
the church as we were in Ephesians 4:1
we heard he gave Apostles and Prophets
evangelist Shepherds elders and
teachers teachers are specifically
mentioned as we already read in Acts
13:1 there were in the Church of Antioch
prophets and
teachers Saul is one of these originally
uh now again Saul is also an apostle uh
Saul is also a teacher uh multiple
people fill multiple roles we've seen
this before we'll see it with Peter with
regards to calling himself an elder uh
and we'll see it with uh Philip the
Evangelist who was actually a deacon
also
there's significant overlaps at times
this is why there is there is a
simplifying of this going forward I
would argue but here we have in Acts 13
verse1 the reference that there are
prophets and teachers and I would argue
in accordance with Ephesians 4:11 this
was one of the offices of the church
there are those who hold that Ephesians
4:11 is referring to four different
offices Apostles prophets evangelists
and Shepherd teachers I disagree uh the
these These are five clearly denoted it
out Apostles prophets evangelists Elders
teachers and the teachers here
specifically are those who in the early
church before the rise of the clarity
that came afterwards during the time of
the Apostles you had an over AB of
things like prophets and teachers and
evangelists and things like this uh
things that are later all folded into
the responsibility of the eldership but
I want you to see uh first of all what
happens here you have teachers in Acts
chap 13:1 you have them showing up as
one of the offices originally given to
the church in Ephesians 4:11 you also
have 1 Timothy 2:
7 Saul again we had his list now he's
Paul writing to Timothy we had him in
the list of acts 131 and we have him
referring to that in 1 Timothy
2:7 he says for this I was appointed a
preacher and an apostle uh I am telling
the truth I am not lying a teacher of
the Gentiles in faith and truth and
there you have the exact same
terminology a
dcals uh this is something uh this would
be an earliest Office of the church that
is a teacher of those there now again at
the very beginning what is it that teach
teachers do they're going to do
something very similar to the prophets
this is more redundancy built in what
are they teaching they're teaching what
Jesus said what are they sharing what is
the gospel what is it that the apostles
are teaching what is it that the
apostles are orally teaching before
they're writing down the New Testament
the this kind of role in fact you have
here Paul before he was even called Paul
back when he was Saul in uh the church
he is one of the teachers he
specifically is a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and Truth
you have him refer to it again when he
writes to Timothy once again in 2
Timothy chapter 1 verse
11 he says for which I was appointed a
preacher and an apostle and
teacher he fulfills one of the roles
very similar to um that of what we would
know as a pastor or an elder uh simply
because we understand that these things
were all Consolidated into something a
little bit later on you'll see this in a
second let's go on to the next one right
when we're in Ephesians
4:11 we have yet again another reference
to this so when you open up Ephesians
4:11 you see it we've talked about it
Apostles we've talked about the prophets
now
evangelists what were the
evangelists we don't have a whole lot of
references to them by the way uh we only
have a couple of them uh and that is
this you have Acts CH 21:8 you have one
of the original Seven deacons Phillip by
name is called an evangelist Philip the
Evangelist that he actually has this
role as one of the leaders in the church
as a deacon he also fulfills one of the
offices or responsibility I don't know
if you can really call them offices one
of the responsibility of the evangelists
the Holy Spirit specifically gave
certain people these types of focuses
and here you have philli being one of
them Philip making uh this role to this
demonstrates for us one of the focuses
of the Evangelist and that is the
sharing of the Gospel to everyone
regardless of where they were regardless
of their uh their town he would travel
constantly through these towns we see
him after the uh the the salvation of
the Ethiopian unic we see him finding
his way to ashdod uh by the Holy Spirit
basically just putting him there and
then going along the Sea Coast all the
way up to cesaria by the Sea and
visiting every single town and sharing
with them the good news of Jesus Christ
This is a fascinating thing and one that
really shouldn't be lost on us uh that
he was then setting up shop in Samaria
because that was one of the goals of the
early church was from Jerusalem to Judea
to Samaria and then as a launching point
to the uttermost parts of the world the
gospel was going to go
we see that it is not only an office in
the early church as expressed in
Ephesians 4:11 or at least a role a very
distinct role in the church not only in
the life of Philip the Evangelist we see
it spelled out in Ephesians 4:11 they
have the same goal again to equip the
Saints for the work of the ministry the
edification of the body of Christ is
always the focus of these roles from
Apostle all
down I mentioned that this is one of
those things kind of like teachers that
gets folded into the elders later on and
that's we'll see that in 2 Timothy 4: 5
uh just in case I forget to make mention
of that later uh which I probably will
forget this um so let's listen to it now
second Timothy Chapter 4: 5 he speaks to
uh a young Elder in the church in
Ephesus named
Timothy and he warns them of the fact
that there will come along those who
teach false
things um they want false teachers right
instead of the teachers that Paul once
was who he was designated a preacher an
apostle and a teacher instead of paying
attention to the true teachers they will
atten pay attention to false teachers
something that that second Peter
actually warns us just like there was
false prophets there's in the age to
come going to be false teachers
something that we always have to be on
the lookout for and judge them by Holy
Scripture here uh we see an early Elder
named Timothy a young Elder named
Timothy uh being encouraged he says uh
in 2 Timothy chap 4: 3-5 listen to this
for the time is coming this is Paul
speaking to Timothy when people will not
endure sound teaching but having itching
ears they will accumulate for themselves
teachers to suit their own passions and
will turn away from listening to the
truth and wander off into myths as for
you always be sober minded enduring
suffering do the work of an evangelist
and fulfill your ministry the work of an
evangelist is something that gets rolled
into at least in this instance if not in
all instances uh specifically into the
role of the Elders of the church now
second Timothy is written very late in
the apostolic era so we're not going to
read it in the same sense as acts chap
218 or even Ephesians 4 but we will
understand that Paul here is saying that
one of the
responsibilities of the New Testament
eldership is going to be the work of the
evangelists uh this is something that a
transition is made later on I wanted to
make sure I don't forget it and so I was
referring to it there now having said
that let's go back to this whole list
now we have Apostles prophets New
Testament prophets teachers evangelists
and Pastor Elder Shepherds whatever you
want to call them they are called called
all sorts of things they are used
interchangeably on
purpose because they have the most
responsibilities of any other office in
the New
Testament except maybe
Apostles the elders Shepherds if you
will the
pastors uh we're going to discuss the
details about this here in just a second
but specifically the Apostles and their
delegates in the book of Acts are
appointed by the apostles
directly uh excuse me the apostles and
their delegates made a habit of
appointing Elders in every church one of
the things I want you to see here there
is
always without exception a plurality of
Elders always even in the Church of
Jerusalem even when it is Prim arily led
by James the brother of Jesus yes the
brother of Jesus we're going to spend a
whole night on that who took a
leadership role in the Church of
Jerusalem not even being an apostle
himself the leadership there in the
Church of Jerusalem is still among the
Elders of the church in Jerusalem you
can see that in Acts chap
21:8 that James and all the elders were
present this this structure actually
comes straight out of Judaism
and the apostles adapt it straight to
the church the Elders of the people
become the Elders of the church not that
the same people I'm saying this kind of
concept that there's not one person in
charge of everything but the elders here
are actually in charge of these things
we do not have ever I want to Simply
point out ever appointed by an apostle
anywhere a single Bishop over a church
that is something that comes up in the
second century here in the scriptures
here in the New Testament era here in
the apostolic church and the
post-apostolic church we do not have
Bishops over a single City that's
something that comes up in the second
century here what we have is as acts
chap 14 verse 23 says the apostles and
their delegates were appointing Elders
in every church when I say the delegates
I do mean people like Titus for instance
who was who was tasked by Paul
personally to go to create and to settle
out which uh which uh towns which elders
and set up Elders in every church that
whole structure is always with
redundancy built in this is something
I'm going to argue here the eldership of
the church was always intended for
redundancy and correction that there
would never be a singular person in
charge of things without corrective
force that was true amongst the apostles
who we saw in the disagreement between
Paul and Peter where Peter was wrong
there's always redundancy in these
offices to self-correct this is the only
way you can lead with fallible people
including
Apostles right we are all sinful we are
all wrong on some level or another but
if you have one person that's in charge
of everyone else there's no one who can
correct them was one of the reasons why
conciliarism later on in church history
comes up and tries to deal with popes
and things like this because you're
having all the authority be brought
together into one person how who can
possibly correct them when they go
Haywire well this is why that entire
structure is absent from the church and
utterly unknown to the
apostles the apostles always appointed
multiple Elders in every Church even if
there was multiple churches in the city
there was always multiple Elders
throughout there's also another one
office that is the old of these uh ones
that still continue on and that is the
deacons deacons not technically a
leadership structure in the church but
it is a service oriented thing they do
have a specific responsibility and I
will just mention in the first church
before we ever get to the 1 Timothy
chapter 3 qualifications we're going to
leave that off until we get into the
post-apostolic church here we're dealing
with the time of the Apostles there was
only three original qualifications and
it's found in Acts chapter 6 there were
to be men of good repute full full of
the spirit and full of wisdom that's
it they were there to free the apostles
up in the Practical management of the
church in Jerusalem and I want you to
see the count of them was only seven for
thousands of Christians uh so their
their role while it was while it was
helpful and service oriented towards the
church was very administrative not
highly personal and it was there
primarily to assist the apostles but
this is one of those fascina
uh things where uh uh all these other
offices and roles have died away or have
gotten Consolidated into the role of the
eldership but the deacons consider
continue on and led their lead their
service to the church in very practical
means uh even
today the post-apostolic leaders now
here's where I want you to see this and
why we laid some of the groundwork
earlier for that of the prophets and the
apostles
in my world in the world of the reformed
Baptists and things like this it is
typically said that there are two
offices of the
church elders and
deacons it is true there are two offices
of the post-apostolic
church those
offices however are not the end of the
story they weren't the beginning of the
story either how much have we seen the
apostles weren't the beginning of the
story they were continuation the New
Testament prophets weren't the beginning
of the prophetic Ministry they were
continuation of the Old Testament as
well all of these things are
continuation because the Old Testament
is directly a part of the New Testament
Church it is their Scriptures it is the
apostles are appealing the scriptures
when they're on the day of Pentecost
they're quoting scripture wherever they
go They're constantly reminding that the
prophets have talked about this Jesus
has fulfilled it now we preach it it's
kind of a remarkable thing that this
gets turned over pretty
quick just because there's two offices
in the church now elders and deacons
doesn't
mean that that's all the leadership that
there
is I would argue there's mo more than
that the first of which is the same that
the apostles had the Old Testament
prophets meaning the Hebrew scriptures
they are one of our sources of
leadership the Old Testament prophets
meaning all the writers of the Hebrew
scriptures their writings the Hebrew
scriptures are still directly
authoritative to the church now these
must be interpreted properly it must be
understood we are not Israel these
things do not apply in the same way but
the Old Testament scriptures are still
our scriptures in fact they are 77% of
our scriptures and they are enormously
important to
us not because we agree with them but
because they are the revelation of God
they are part of the story just because
they're the last chapter before us
doesn't mean that somehow it's not
applicable they are applicable directly
it doesn't mean that we moralize them
they are our scriptures they are spoken
by our God they are given to our
ancestors in the faith and they are our
scriptures and so everything that
applied earlier of the Old Testament
prophets leadership for the apostles
where the bereans were searching these
things to see if the apostles were true
we still do that
today not just the leaders of the church
not just pastors like myself all
Christians are to search the scriptures
to see if these things are so test your
leaders test your Bishops test your
popes test everything by scripture test
the
apostles because what you're going to
find is that there is consistency
between those who are true those who are
true to the scriptures those who are
true to the apostles and those who are
true true to the rest of the scriptures
and so the leadership of the
church excuse me must include the Old
Testament prophets in their writings the
Hebrew scriptures but now in the
post-apostolic
era as the apostles began dying one of
the things that they do is their
Authority is codified in
writings we are going to spend an entire
evening I already have it written uh
because of something that I would love
to talk about but we're not quite right
there yet an entire evening entitled The
Inevitable New
Testament there is something expected
the apostolic leadership is going to die
away and so we need something very
similar to what the Old Testament
prophets did they wrote these things
down why because they were going to die
Daniel himself has told about these
things write these things down you're
going to lie with your fathers to the
apostles the same thing you're going to
die and then you're going to have to
write these things down and they do and
while they're writing these things down
the apostles are giving testimony and
wait to the authenticity of the other
writings you have Paul quoting from the
Gospel of Luke in the early 60s calling
it scripture compare lining it right up
with
Deuteronomy right you have these types
of references you have Peter referring
to Paul's writings of scripture these
types of things are still alive during
the apostolic era there's redundancy
between the apostles you have one of the
roles of the New Testament prophets is
an identify what is inspired and what is
not these things are severely important
to us and so in the post-apostolic
church as the apostles are dying out you
have a change over in the role of the
Apostles As Leaders into the church and
it is codified in the New
Testament the same way the Old Testament
prophets were codified in the Old
Testament the apostles teachings are
cified in the New Testament in fact we
do not have a single syllable
from the prophets from the apostles and
from Jesus that does not find its home
in scripture all of them come from the
scriptures we have nothing outside of
them that is authoritative on that level
at all it doesn't mean there's not
authorities in addition to scripture
that are secondary and Prim and tertiary
and all that stuff scripture now in the
post-apostolic era after the apostles
die out is primary Authority for us why
because everything else has to be
weighed by it everyone else and the same
way that the bereans search the
scriptures to judge the teaching of the
Apostles Christian it is on
you to verify in the scriptures the ones
that are teaching you I don't care who
they are or what their claim to
Authority structure is or anything else
or how old their church is or anything
if it does not line up with and is
consistent have its origin in scripture
you got a
problem you got a pretty big problem
actually their writings the apostles
writings the Greek New Testament are
still directly authoritative in the
church just like the Old Testament
scriptures are we have the same Noble
task as the bereans to search the New
Testament and now the Old Testament as
well to see if the claims of our leaders
are true or false are they consistent
with the scriptures are they so
much talk has had about Apostolic
succession being attached to a special
monarchical Bishop of a city like this
bishop of this city or Bishop of that
City that concept does not exist in the
first century it does not exist in the
second generation of the church or the
third when we talk about these things
those are later things that crop up in
some areas and tend towards that and
take over everything by the end of the
second century but that is not the
original way it is set
up and I would actually argue that
that's not even what Apostolic
succession means true Apostolic
succession is an authority born by all
leaders of the church when they teach
what the apostles and Prophets taught
meaning the scriptures outside of that
they do have the secondary authorities
denoted by the limits of their offices
oversight care Direction worship things
like this but it must always be done
consistently with the
scriptures it must
be and so with that those are the two
main sources of leadership in the church
what you and I would call in shorthand
the Bible the Old and New Testament
together make up the two main leadership
structures of the church and now we have
the offices
elders elders in the post-apostolic era
are a
conglomerate responsibilities of the
Shepherds the teachers the evangelists
they are are the catchall for everything
they are literally called so many
different terminologies in scripture
episcopo
presbyteros uh pain meaning Shepherd or
Pastor uh and then even generally in in
Hebrews 13 as hug menos uh meaning
leaders or rulers it they have so many
different titles but they're all the
same thing whe whether Bishops or Elders
overseers pastors Shepherd teachers
whatever you want to call it if it's one
office that office is always notice the
S on the end of Elders always plural
always there is no exception to that in
the New Testament I just I could keep
pointing that out because people forget
that as time goes on and I want to talk
to you a little bit about the
responsibilities of the elders first
what were the
responsibilities there's two main
passages that we can see for this and
that is First Peter chapter 5 I want to
read that verses 1-4
and Acts chapter 20 we'll get there so
let's do 1 Peter 5 1 what does he
say he says so I exhort the elders among
you as a fellow Elder and a witness by
the way here is Peter the Apostle
referring to himself as a fellow Elder
do you notice the attitude of
collegiality do you notice his
submission to other Elders in the church
do you notice his attention to this as
he calls himself a fellow Elder and and
the witness and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ as well as a
partaker in the glory that is going to
be revealed what is it that Elders do
they shepherd the flock of God that is
among you exercising
oversight you're not to do this under
compulsion you're to do it willingly as
God would have you it is not for money
or and shameful game no you do it
eagerly not domineering over those in
your charge but being examples to the
flock this is how you do it you do not
insist on your own authority left and
right what you do is you are a good
example why because you are not the
chief shepher there is a chief Shepherd
that is Christ we've already talked
about Christ the head of church history
you will receive the unfading Crown of
Glory we learn a lot about Elders in
that passage most of it stands on its
own and I would encourage you to see
that Elders operate with the concept um
again elders presbyteros
these uh presbuteros rather they
emphasize maturity and Leadership uh the
term episcopo here uh oversight overseer
this is this is what uh Bishops um again
plural emphasizing their overs
overseeing
responsibilities um you are a Shepherd
uh it emphasizes their care and guidance
like there's so many aspects of this we
already saw Timothy being called uh to
do the work of an evangelist that you
are supposed to be able to teach if you
are an elder all of these things will
come out you can see in Acts chap 20:
28-31 where Paul is talking to the
Elders of Ephesus again plural always he
says to them pay careful attention to
yourselves and to all the flock in which
the Holy Spirit has made you again
overseers Elders that are now also
overseers to care for the Church of God
which he obtained with his own blood now
that's that's kind of their main
responsibility to care for the church he
says I know that after my departure
Fierce wolves will come in among you not
sparing the flock and then he describes
there's going to be
Elders that will speak Twisted things
from among your own selves will arise
men speaking Twisted things to draw away
the disciples the Christians after them
therefore be alert remembering that for
three years I did not cease night and
day to admonish everyone with tears here
we have Paul warning that there's going
to be evil false elders
false
Bishops they are speaking Twisted things
and they're going to lead disciples away
after them it is the responsibility of
true Elders to warn the
flock and to protect the flock and to
care for the Church of God just because
somebody is in an office of elder or
bishop or anything else does not in any
way make them infallible
period regardless of what some Churches
claim fallibility is always on the
table when it comes to anyone fulfilling
any office the office does not perfect
it does not change you it does not
ontologically change who you are or
anything like this no we have direct
reference here to the idea that just
because somebody is an office does not
mean that it is protecting them in any
way at any point from speaking Twisted
things and so we have to all give
attention to our maturity and
Clarity and so that is why for the
church we are never just to look at what
somebody says and that's the end of the
story we also have to weigh their lives
and that is why the qualifications of
Elders is not a whole bunch of right
theology but instead the outcome of
these things in their lives 1 Timothy 3
and Fir and Titus Chapter 1 give a
direct outline of the qualifications of
Elders I'm not going to read that at
length because almost everybody is aware
of that um just to say it's 1 Timothy 3
1-7 oh let me just read through them I'm
just not going to pick them apart 1
Timothy 3
1-7 the saying is trustworthy if anyone
aspires to the office of overseer he
desires a noble task therefore an
overseer must be above reproach a
husband of one wife sober mind yeah
there is no yeah there is there is no
um uh single Elders in the church
doesn't work like that sober-minded
self-controlled respectable hospitable
able to teach not a drunkard not violent
but gentle not quarrelsome not a lover
of money he must manage his own
household well with all dignity keeping
his children submissive for if someone
does not know how to manage his own
household how will he care for God's
church he must not be a recent convert
or he may become puffed up with conceit
and fall into the condemnation of the
devil moreover he must be well thought
of by Outsiders so that he may not fall
into disgrace into a snare of the
devil we learn a lot of aspects about
this they have to be married they have
to if they have children those children
need to be raised in a certain manner
their household needs to be controlled
well uh and managed well there needs to
be an outcome of faith in his life that
is consistent again there's that
terminology with all of the scriptures
Titus 1 where Paul is writing to Titus
uh who is by the way not an elder he is
a sent one from the apostles um I don't
know what exact official title you would
say this other than an Apostles
delegate he says to him this is why I
left you in cre so that you might put
what remained into order and appoint
Elders in every town as I directed you
again plural always if anyone is above
reproach the husband of one wife look
again very similar list here his
children are believers not open to the
charges of debauchery or insubordination
for an overseer as God's Steward must be
above reproach he must not be arrogant
or quick-tempered or a drunkard or
violent or greedy for gain but
hospitable a lover of good
self-controlled upright holy and
disciplined he must hold firm to the
trustworthy word is taught again his
relationship to scripture is Paramount
so that he may be able to give
instruction and sound Doctrine and also
to rebuke those who contradict it in
other words the trustworthy word as
taught is all of the scriptures that God
inspired
regardless of what age you are in if you
are in a th000 BC your scriptures is
going to be much shorter than the ones
we have now today in the year
2024 the the trustworthy word is taught
is all of the scriptures from Genesis
through
Revelation why do we do this because
there's no other way to rebuke false
teachers false Elders speaking Twisted
things but the scriptures
the church fathers will not save you
here they disagree with each other very
often as well the scriptures alone are
able to do this and that's why we hold
firm to them and nothing else not on
that level
anyway that brings us to the second of
the offices
deacons the office of deacons as we saw
last time is the oldest of the current
offices they existed before the elders
again Deacons are always referred to in
plural we see that in the in the opening
to The Book of Philippians they are
greeted there specifically again dionos
uh is always we have the plural form of
it showing up with these things um when
regards to an entire church the church
in Jerusalem had at least seven of them
uh but it seems that uh Philip didn't
stay around very long which is a really
interesting part of that story um they
ensure uh I I'll put this it's really
hard to codify the role of deacons in
the New Testament so I'm going to put
mine out here I I would say that they
are the most practically adaptable of
the two churches offices because the
Elder's role and responsibility is
really clearly spelled out deacons not
so much they ensure smooth operation of
the church and that nobody has
overlooked that's how I'm going to
explain them
right the requirements or the
qualifications if you will of deacons is
found in 1 Timothy 3
8-13 Deacons
likewise must be dignified not double
tonged not addicted to much wine not
greedy for dishonest gain they must hold
the mystery of the Faith with a clear
conscience and let them be tested first
and then let them serve as deacons if
they prove themselves blameless again
blameless is a high bar here uh their
wives likewise must be dignified not
slanderers but sober minded and faithful
in all things let deacons each be the
husband of one wife managing their
children and their own households well
for those who serve well as deacons gain
a good standing for themselves and also
great confidence in the faith that is in
Christ Jesus remarkable promise to
deacons and those who fill the one of
the more important roles in the New
Testament
Church all of that to say no specific
goal or uh or specific role are we found
for deacons other than they ensure the
operation of the church runs smoothly
and nobody's overlooked uh I would say
that that would be the the the most
direct description of the deacon
position the office of Deacon in the New
Testament um specifically the word
Deacon just comes from the Greek word to
serve and so obviously it is part of
that they are Servants of the church it
is an office they are specific to that I
would uh I would say they have to be
elected to that because there is a
consent of the church mentioned
specifically uh for this um and you will
find uh you will find that in Acts
chapter 6 uh even the apostles did not
uh did not choose these men the people
of the church chose these men right you
can see that in Acts chap 6: 1-6 if you
want to go back to that uh we talked
about that a little bit longer last time
we were together when we talked about
the first two deacons um being step and
Phillip there's a couple of notable
absences by the
way uh here from uh from this we we find
that
um we find that there is no monarchical
Bishop you'll notice there's no
priests uh there's
no archbishops there's no any of this
those things are later with regards to
the close of the New Testament and the
close even of the first century
including everything we have reference
to the diday uh first Clement uh you
what you have is references to
multiplicity of Elders everywhere every
city had multiple Elders every single
Town had multiple Elders every church
had multiple Elders everywhere it
doesn't mean that there wasn't one who
was the primary teacher we do that now
even in Elder Le churches it means
though that with authority with
responsibility with oversight of the
church it is always a shared Authority
period there is no exception to that I
want to emphasize that over and over and
over again because the concept of
authority is going to be one of the most
divisive things in the church going
forward in the church's history as well
as in our modern day as well and so with
that I hope this has been helpful to you
to be able to see the apostolic church
that first generation of the church with
the apostles with the Old Testament
prophets with the evangelists and the
teachers um and uh the New Testament
prophets the elders and the deacons and
then we've have it codified down in the
post-apostolic churches once the
apostles begin dying out we and they
come to the end of their lives we see
that the apostles left to the church the
Old Testament prophets in the Hebrew
scriptures the New Testament
Apostles in the New Testament scriptures
meaning the Bible and then elders and
deacons it is what we
have you can see the very way that this
is discussed Peter talks about it in 1
Peter 2 saying that the the church was
founded on the foundation stone runs of
the prophet and the
apostles Christ himself being the
Cornerstone and all of us are being
built up as living stones a temple a
holy priesthood a temple in which a uh
spiritual sacrifices are demate
sacrifices of Praise sacrifices of
Thanksgiving remarkable language and as
we work through church history I want
you to have this as your background
regarding the leadership that was given
to us the structure that was given to us
in the Holy
scriptures with that we're going to
close out this study and I will say um
as we look forward to the coming weeks
may God bless you I really look forward
to uh to peeling apart the next sections
of this early first century walkthrough
Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]